# Lambad
_A Lambda Calculus-like Programming Language, but Worse_

## Concept (and a brief introduction to lambda calculus)

**_Lambad_** is meant as an [esoteric](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Esoteric_programming_language) (AKA _cursed_) programming language based on lambda calculus.

[Lambda calculus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lambda_calculus) is a mathematical formalism developed by Alonzo Church (widely considered to be one of the 'founding fathers of computer science') in the 1930's as a means to rigorously define the concept of 'computation'. This 'calculus' consists of a family of expressions (or terms) constructed using a certain syntax (more on that later) and a couple operations that allow us to transform a given expression into another (hopefully simpler) expression; a process known as reduction. Church intended to represent any computation (for instance, an algorithm for adding two numbers) as a lambda calculus expression which might then be reduced until we arrive to a term that can no longer be reduced, which is interpreted as the resulting value.

Although lambda calculus has a remarkably simple structure (terms are constructed using only 3 rules and solved using just 2 reduction operations) the kind of computations it is able to model is surprisingly large. In fact, the computing power of lambda calculus was proven to be equivalent to that of a rather famous model designed by one of Church's students, one Alan Turing. Turing machines, the basis for modern computers (and basically all programming languages except for a handful renegades) and lambda calculus were proven to be equivalent in the [Church-Turing thesis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church%E2%80%93Turing_thesis), which we might as well call the very foundation of computer science.

Lambda calculus has sits at the core of many useful applications such as [functional programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_programming), as well as number of niche or less useful application, such as functional programming [_using Haskell_](https://xkcd.com/1312/). Many derivative formalisms build upon lambda calculus by adding features (as in _typed_ lambda calculus) or which manage to achieve Turing-completeness with an even simpler structure (as in the [SKI combinator calculus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SKI_combinator_calculus) or [Iota and Jot systems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iota_and_Jot)).

To the best of my knowledge, _Lambad_ does not contribute any helpful features to standard lambda calculus and, if forever reason it does, it's not by design. That said, a Lambad term will often be shorter than the corresponding lambda expression (for example, the identity function `λx.x` might be written as just `:` in Lambad) and the way expressions are constructed by keeping a list of sub-expressions could possibly be make some derivations easier.

It must also be said that while lambda calculus is connected to Church and churches are places of worship, Lambad [consistently strays away from any good-intending god](## "a feature it shares with other lambda-calculus derivatives, very much including Haskell").

## Even more lambda calculus concepts

In order to [approach Lambad](## "not necessarily a good idea, be warned"), it will be useful to at least have a basic understanding of how lambda calculus expressions works. If you're already used to the topic, feel [free](## "hopefully no one is forcing you to read the rest of this article either") to skip this section over.

Fortunately, as mentioned above, lambda calculus is remarkably simple in its structure. A lambda expression (or [term](## "the two words are used equivalently, or at least _I_ do so")) can only take one of the following three forms:
- A _variable_ (usually represented by a letter such as `x` or `y`, it represents a certain value which could possibly be a function)
- An _application_ of one lambda expression to another. This is represented by writing one expression after the other, seperated by a space (you might also want to add brackets as well). For instance, `f x`  represents an application of a function `f` (represented as a variable) to a value `x` (another variable); what we'd write as _f(x)_ in maths. Keep in mind that applications can have more complex lambda terms on either side.
- An _abstraction_ which indicates an expression that can be computed for a certain variable. This can be understood as a definition for a function with a single variable. In maths, we might define a function by indicating what variable we're using and what we're doing with; for instance, in the identity function  _f(x) = x_ the left hand side (the _f(x)_) tells us we're using a variable _x_ while the right hand side (_= x_) tells us how we compute the result. Lambda abstractions do the same, except that they use the funky notation `λ VARIABLE . EXPRESSION` (in the case of the identity, _f(x) = x_ we get `λx.x`) and we require the 'body' of the function to also be a lambda expression. The expression within an abstraction is sometimes referred to as its 'body'. Keep in mind that the results might also be functions themselves; in general just be aware that [everything can and _will_ work as a function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First-class_function).

These constructor operations can be used repeatedly to create increasingly complex lambda terms. For instance, `λf.λx.(f (f x))` is a lambda expression which can be interpreted as an _apply twice_ opperator: it expects a function parameter `f`, a value `x` and 'returns' a `(f (f x))`, which in standard mathematical notation corresponds to `f(f(x))` (`f` applied twice to `x`). Observe that this longer expression can be built using the constructors as follows:
- `x` is a valid expression because it is a _variable_.
- `f` is a valid expression because it is a _variable_.
- `f x` is a valid expression because it is an _application_ of the expression `f` to the expression `x`.
- `f (f x)` is a valid expression because it is an _application_ of the expression `f` to the expression `f x`.
- `λx.(f (f x))` is a valid expression because it is an _abstraction_ with the variable `x` and the expression `f (f x)`.
- `λf.λx.(f (f x))` is a valid expression because it is an _abstraction_ with the variable `f` and the expression `λx.(f (f x))`.

This idea of constructing expressions sequentially will be important for _Lambad_.

The name (or symbol) used for a variable doesn't really matter, it's only the relationship between variables (their relative order, if you will) that matters: `λx.x` is the same as `λy.y`, `x (λy.λz.y)` is the same as `q (λw.λe.w)`, `λx.(x y)` is the same as `λy.(y x)`, but you couldn't freely replace `λx.(x y)` with `λx.(y x)` as that alters the relationship between the variables. Properly-made variable re-labelling is one of the operations defined by Church, known as α-conversion (that's _alpha_ conversion).

There are a number of subtleties in the way lambda expressions are used in computations (I'd very much encourage you to look [elsewhere](https://www.google.com/search?q=lambda+calculus) for in depth descriptions of how β-redexes and α-conversions work; they're considerably less scary than the Greek letters in their names would suggest), but the gist of it is that if can resolve the _application_ of an _abstraction_ to a certain argument by taking the body in the abstraction and replacing any occurrence of the variable with the argument. That is exactly the same as computing the value of a function in maths: if you have _f(x) = x² + x_, and you want to compute the value _f(3)_, you just have to replace the variable _x_ with _3_ in the body _x² + x_, which gives you _f(3) = 3² + 3 = 9 + 3 = 12_. In the same vein, `(λx.f x) (g y)` will _reduce_ to `f (g y)` because that's what we get by replacing the variable `x` with the argument `g y` in the body expression `f x`.

Programmers who haven't had to deal with functional programming (_yet_) might have noticed something odd: lambda calculus has _variables_ that might stand for a value (including functions!) but it has no way of _setting_ the value of a variable. This is by design; in lambda calculus we aren't concerned with with values, it's only functions and the way they might be composed that really matters. Back to the _apply twice_ example, we could have had just `f (f x)` to represent _f(f(x))_, but we aren't able to do anything with that expression as there's nothing to tell us how `f` and `x` might behave. That is why we're interested in including abstractions as in `λf.λx.(f (f x))`: this allows us to receive `f` and `x` as values which might have some internal structure (such as being abstractions or applications themselves) which might allow us to operate further.

The occurrences of an abstraction's variable within its body (such as `x` and `f` in `λf.λx.(f (f x))`) are said to be _bound_. By contrast, variables which are not bound within an abstraction (such as `f` in the intermediate step `λx.(f (f x))`) are said to be _free variables_. When handling computations, we're only interested in lambda expressions without any free variables ('fully qualified', which is why _Lambad_ is only able to build terms without free variables.

Given an arbitrary lambda expression which _might_ contain free variables, it's pretty simple to transform it into a Lambad-compatible fully qualified expression: just add abstractions for any free variable in the same way we transformed `f (f x)` into `λf.λx.(f (f x))`. This can be fairly useful: if know we're only using a certain set of variables and all of our expressions are meant to be fully-qualified, we could write the unqualified form with free variables _as a shortcut_: then _`f (f x)`_ wouldn't stand for the actual expression `f (f x)` but just by an abbreviation for `λf.λx.(f (f x))`. This sort of abbreviations are justifiedly not allowed in standard lambda calculus (where non-fully-qualified expressions such as `f (f x)` are valid) but they will be a major component of _Lambad_, where the requirement that all expressions be fully qualified prevents any ambiguity.
